Step 4 - Velocity and Sprint Goals.
You really can't have one without the other.
So to recap, we have the sprint backlog with our story points.
The backlog is in priority order,
but how much of the sprint backlog can we get done in this upcoming sprint?
As we mentioned earlier in this module,
the amount of work a team can produce in a single
sprint is known as the velocity.
Before we see what might fix into the next sprint, let's look at capacity.
It's important to briefly discuss capacity and compare it to velocity.
Most of us are likely familiar with the term capacity.
We use capacity to figure out how much work is possible to be produced.
For example, if I have three people full time,
that is 40 hours per week, for 2 weeks, my capacity is 240 hours.
It is quite different in the Agile/Scrum world.
Here we use the term velocity as our tool to plan work rather than capacity.
Velocity is the amount of work a team can undertake.
The velocity value is based on historical data.
That is the average number of story points that have been
delivered per sprint is our velocity.
Now let's see an example.
We calculate velocity by taking the total number of story points
completed divided by the number of sprints.
So it's a very simple calculation.
Now velocity can change over time and is a much
better measurement than just capacity.
Capacity is more like what we could produce,
whereas velocity is what the team is more likely to produce,
and we are more likely to produce it because we're
using historical data sprint by sprint,
calculating the average velocity over time.
And as I said, the velocity may change over time because the team gets better,
gets smarter, gets more experienced,
or might get a little bit less over time because someone
may leave the company or leave the team,
etc.
Step 4 - Velocity and Sprint Potential.
Now let's use our velocity to see if we can get all of our
story points completed in this planned sprint.
So total story points completed to date on our project is 531,
and that is divided by the number of sprints to date,
which is 11.
So the average story points per sprint is 48.
Here in our sprint backlog, we have a total of 44 story points,
so we can fit the 44 planned story points into our
velocity with 4 points to spare, also known as slack.
And we will talk about slack in the next module.
With only 4 points to spare,
I would not choose to bring forward any additional
user stories or other activity, but just keep that as a cushion.
Naturally,
there is nothing wrong by introducing the knowledge and value
of your velocity in the previous step to help in the
prioritization process and its outcomes.
Team velocity is a key planning element of sprint planning,
but why does it seem to change over time?
Let's look at some examples.
Velocity will be unstable initially,
so give it three or four iterations before you see it settle down and stabilize.
As you learn more about the business domain and the technology,
it is likely the velocity will increase.
As you work more as a team and better understand and work
with the Agile processes themselves,
it is likely the velocity will increase as well.
Team members will come and go.
At times, you may be down a member or two,
which will affect your velocity,
and at times you may even have new people that have yet to come up to speed.
This variance is totally normal in tracking your velocity trend,
can produce some interesting information.
But in my opinion, this information should be kept to the team.
Comparing velocity across teams really makes no sense at all.
Different teams will have different ways of estimating, may weight user stories differently, and a host of other variabilities.